134. Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta
Lomasakangiya and A Single Excellent Night

1. Thus have I heard.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
Now on that occasion the venerable Lomasakangiya was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.

2. Then, when the night was well advanced, Candana, a young deity of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of Nigrodha’s Park, approached the venerable Lomasakangiya.
Standing at one side, Candana the young deity said to him:

“Bhikkhu, do you remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”

“Friend, I do not remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
But, friend, do you remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”

“Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
But, bhikkhu, do you remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”

“Friend, I do not remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
But, friend, do you remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”

“Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’”

“But, friend, in what way do you remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”

“Bhikkhu, once the Blessed One was living among the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, on the Red Marble Stone at the root of the Pāricchattaka tree.
There the Blessed One recited the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ to the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three:

3. ‘Let not a person revive the past

Or on the future build his hopes;

For the past has been left behind

And the future has not been reached.

Instead with insight let him see

Each presently arisen state;

Let him know that and be sure of it,

Invincibly, unshakeably.

Today the effort must be made;

Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?

No bargain with Mortality

Can keep him and his hordes away.

But one who dwells thus ardently,

Relentlessly, by day, by night-

It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said,

Who has had a single excellent night.’

4. “Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ thus.
Bhikkhu, learn the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
Bhikkhu, master the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had A Single Excellent Night.’
Bhikkhu, remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
Bhikkhu, the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ is beneficial, it belongs to the fundamentals of the holy life.”

That is what was said by Candana the young deity, who thereupon vanished at once.

5. Then, when the night was over, the venerable Lomasakangiya set his resting place in order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out to wander by stages to Sāvatthī.
He at length arrived at Sāvatthī, and went to the Blessed One in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
After paying homage to him, he sat down at one side, told the Blessed One all that had occurred, and said: “It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would teach me the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’”

6. “Bhikkhu, do you know that young deity?”

“No, venerable sir.”

“Bhikkhu, that young deity is named Candana.
He heeds the Dhamma, gives it attention, engages it with all his mind, hears it with eager ears.
So, bhikkhu, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Lomasakangiya replied to the Blessed One.
The Blessed One said this:

7-14.
“Let not a person revive the past…

(Repeat the whole of Sutta 131, §§3-10 up to:)

Who has had a single excellent night.”

That is what the Blessed One said.
The Venerable Lomasakangiya was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

