Middle Discourses 116
At Isigili

So I have heard.
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Isigili Mountain.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
“Mendicants!”
“Venerable sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:

“Mendicants, do you see that Mount Vebhāra?”
“Yes, sir.”
“It used to have a different label and description.
Do you see that Mount Paṇḍava?”
“Yes, sir.”
“It too used to have a different label and description.
Do you see that Mount Vepulla?”
“Yes, sir.”
“It too used to have a different label and description.
Do you see that Mount Vulture’s Peak?”
“Yes, sir.”
“It too used to have a different label and description.
Do you see that Mount Isigili?”
“Yes, sir.”

“It used to have exactly the same label and description.
Once upon a time, five hundred Buddhas awakened for themselves dwelt for a long time on this Isigili.
They were seen entering the mountain, but after entering were seen no more.
When people noticed this they said:
‘That mountain swallows these hermits!’
That’s how it came to be known as Isigili.
I shall declare the names of the Buddhas awakened for themselves;
I shall extol the names of the Buddhas awakened for themselves;
I shall teach the names of the Buddhas awakened for themselves.
Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”
“Yes, sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:

“The Buddhas awakened for themselves who dwelt for a long time on this Isigili were named Ariṭṭha,
Upariṭṭha,
Tagarasikhin,
Yasassin,
Sudassana,
Piyadassin,
Gandhāra,
Piṇḍola,
Upāsabha,
Nītha,
Tatha,
Sutavā,
and Bhāvitatta.

Those saintly beings, untroubled and free of hope,
who each achieved awakening by themselves;
hear me extol their names,
the supreme persons, free of thorns.
Ariṭṭha, Upariṭṭha, Tagarasikhin, Yasassin,
Sudassana, and Piyadassin the awakened;
Gandhāra, Piṇḍola, and Upāsabha,
Nītha, Tatha, Sutavā, and Bhāvitatta.

Sumbha, Subha, Methula, and Aṭṭhama,
and Assumegha, Anīgha, and Sudāṭha,
awakened for themselves, enders of the attachment to rebirth.
Hiṅgū, and Hiṅga the mighty.
Two sages named Jāli, and Aṭṭhaka.
Then the Buddha Kosala and Subāhu;
Upanemi, Nemi, and Santacitta,
right and true, stainless and astute.
Kāḷa and Upakāḷa, Vijita and Jita,
Aṅga and Paṅga, and Guttijita too;
Passin gave up attachment, suffering’s root,
while Aparājita defeated Māra’s power.
Satthar, Pavattar, Sarabhaṅga, Lomahaṁsa,
Uccaṅgamāya, Asita, Anāsava,
Manomaya, and Bandhumant the cutter of conceit,
and Tadādhimutta the immaculate and resplendent.
Ketumbarāga, Mātaṅga, and Ariya,
then Accuta, Accutagāma, and Byāmaka,
Sumaṅgala, Dabbila, Supatiṭṭhita,
Asayha, Khemābhirata, and Sorata.
Durannaya, Saṅgha, and also Ujjaya,
another sage, Sayha of peerless effort.
There are twelve Ānandas, Nandas, and Upanandas,
and Bhāradvāja, bearing his final body.
Bodhi, also Mahānāma the supreme,
# NOTE: Not sure why BB takes these as descriptions of Bharadvaja, it sounds unlikely that a paccekabuddha would be described as “beautiful, with crested mane”! Comm is silent here, which I take as endorsing the default, i.e. a straight list of names.
Kesin, Sikhin, Sundara, and Bhāradvāja,
Tissa and Upatissa, who’ve both cut the bonds to rebirth,
Upasīdarin and Sīdarin, who’ve both cut off craving.
Maṅgala was awakened, free of greed,
Usabha cut the net, the root of suffering,
Upanīta who attained the state of peace,
Uposatha, Sundara, and Saccanāma.
Jeta, Jayanta, Paduma, and Uppala;
Padumuttara, Rakkhita, and Pabbata,
Mānatthaddha, beautiful and free of greed,
and the Buddha Kaṇha, his mind well freed.

These and other mighty ones awakened for themselves,
enders of the attachment to rebirth—
honor these great hermits who are fully extinguished,
having got past all ties, limitless.”

